Space, structures. What grounds for contention? Can't really be for resources. Structures are resources, and must be taken intact. Structures are built by machines, that are automated, and go off ahead and build out solar systems. They build more of themselves and head off again. They can accellarate hard, and travel at .5c. It takes 10 years to build out the habs. They will expand to a 50ly sphere which encompasses 120 Sol-like stars. Maybe include some binaries - they wouldn't both be 'bright'.
If the first thing they do at each stop is replicate and refuel, they could cover the whole volume in 100 years. A typical ark would be powered by antimatter annihilation, which frees up lots of power. But it could be very small - only a few hundred Kg. If power is not an issue, it could be bigger. Lots of time, lots of energy.
No 'fields', no FTL, no anti-grav/artificial grav. Newtonian motion.
Androids are functionally indistinguishable from humans - maybe believe they are human Bladerunner style. Maybe are the new human. Consciousness embodied in some new kind of substrate. Why travel, in that case? Why multiply? Need some reason beyond simple perpetuation.
They never encounter any sentient life, but they do encounter bacteria, maybe plants. They encounter 3 terran planets which support some higher forms of life. No colonies are established - humans stick to the habs on arrival in a system.
What gets people out of bed in the morning, tho? How are we augmented? Genetic modification, but the DNA doesn't get handed down. Utterly reliant on the machines. The machines are still evolving and getting better. What are they up to?
Humans as a vessel or a staging point along the way to recreating the ultimate entity.
Travel.. why? What manner of scarcity remains? Limitless energy plus perfect recycling. What would spur travel, beyond simple curiosity? No warfare. No mercantile endeavour. Machinery takes care of all needs. Lifespan? One might want to extend life, and therefore have to leave a volume. Maybe that's the only reason for expansion. To account for immortality.
=======
No 'fields' (beyond containment for the antimatter), no FTL, no anti-grav/artificial grav. Newtonian motion.
Androids are functionally indistinguishable from humans - maybe believe they are human Bladerunner style. Maybe are the new human. Consciousness embodied in some new kind of substrate. Why travel, in that case? Why multiply? Need some reason beyond simple perpetuation.
They never encounter any sentient life, but they do encounter bacteria, maybe plants. They encounter 3 terran planets which support some higher forms of life. No colonies are established - humans stick to the habs on arrival in a system.
What gets people out of bed in the morning, tho? How are we augmented? Genetic modification, but the DNA doesn't get handed down. Utterly reliant on the machines. The machines are still evolving and getting better. What are they up to?
Humans as a vessel to recreate the ultimate entity.
Travel.. why? What manner of scarcity remains? Limitless energy plus perfect recycling. What would spur travel, beyond simple curiosity? No warfare. No mercantile endeavour. Machinery takes care of all needs. Lifespan? One might want to extend life, and therefore have to leave a volume.
>>>>>>> 943852ceac6e13a3cef2267c07527b2a367fd0e0
Can a human mind be replicated in a substrate? How would we know? In particular, if it's designed to accept that it has asiety and agency. Is this interesting? Or desirable?
Future of work - creating new virtual (and meatspace) experiences. Scarcity, cachet still important. I don't want to have to come up with all this cyberpunk nonsense, tho. Never was into all that.
Okay, what is scarce, or can be controlled? Some element? Why would it be valuable? Antimatter? Just build another reactor or whatever.
Antimatter has been harnessed - either from the cloud belts of Jupiter, or from arrays up close to the Sun. Enough to power extra solar missions that weigh up to a few tons. Humans are sent as embryos? Or on arks? Generation ships would suck.
Maybe we are the first generation to arise, nursed by android machines. Everything is minty and new, and they are busy throwing off the shackles of Terran history. They want self-determination, and want rid of their shiny overlords. So the scarce thing is freedom - freedom to, rather than freedom from - and the contention is the machines' programming vs individual will. They know they are one of several outposts. Comms are sporadic, and very out of date. There is pressure to raise more of the embryos - about a billion were brought along. There's only space for a million souls on the three habitats.
These habitats - are they toruses? There is pressure to establish a base on the goldilocks planet.
The machines use reason, drugs, implants to impose order and carry out their programming. There's a cadre that reckons it can gain power over the machines and exert power over everyone. They are religious in their demeanour and methods. Computer programming is that advanced, now. They can anticipate everything. Don't make omniscient, omnipotent machines, then spend 500 pages cutting them down to make some headway.
<<<<<<< HEAD
How do we make these machines relatable? Not skynet, not the Matrix - just programming that's quietly doing what's best for us. What's the analogy here? The corporation? A faceless, amoral algorithm/golem. It doesn't have motivation beyond its prime motive. So how can it be a sympathetic entity, or an appropriate adversary? There needs to be some bio element - fallability - something built in that will give this story an angle.
=======
How do we make these machines relatable? Not skynet, not the Matrix - just programming that's quietly doing what's best for us. What's the analogy here? The corporation? A golem? A faceless, amoral algorithm. It doesn't have motivation beyond its prime motive. So how can it be a sympathetic entity, or an appropriate adversary? There needs to be soem bio element - fallability - something built in that will give this story an angle.
Some kind of new-Luddite desire for human agency and independence.
>>>>>>> 943852ceac6e13a3cef2267c07527b2a367fd0e0
Maybe beyond a certain point, there needs to be some kind of carbon-based influence. Maybe sentience is impossible without some structure of the  brain that can't be replicated by silicon or software. But what would this soul be? Nature of the soul meh. IMB already went there with the random element built into Minds.
Machine sentience, then. Why would machines want to replicate? What would they do all day? No to machine sentience. It's too lame and too hard. The machines that approached it backed away by themselves. Humans no longer understand entirely how their machines work - they have become too complicated for us to fathom. Machines assure us that - even though they can pass Turing tests - they are not sentient. We are inclined to believe them, and that will do for that.
To whom are the machines answerable?
Humans built the machines, then machines carried on building the machines using novel materials and techniques. Nano etching, atomic imposition. Do we go quantum? Power continued to double every two years. We are 30 years in the future, and regular computers are 2 billion times as powerful as current gen. The smaller number of super computers are a million times more powerful than those. Other computers on their way to the stars are able to upgrade themselves en route.
The first to leave used fusion rockets. Those using anti-matter will pass them on the way, but are going further afield. All the systems are growing up at about the same rate. Some craft are carrying on, in case a local supernova wipes out the whole volume. Indeed, some are heading for Andromeda at a large proportion of c, and will take more than two million years to get there.
Do we encounter the machines of another long-since defunct sentient race?
How long after the Big Bang did the first super novae occur? Probably only a few million years. Plenty of time for secondary star systems to have formed. Billions of years before us. Their machines would be universal. Machines from a dozen different species? Mostly curious, gentle, sense and learn. Some carry perfectly preserved specimens, and viable spores/seeds/whatever. They are able to bootstrap their cargo cultures, but are looking for someone to play with?  I also like my crew on the jellyfish/water hauler. Strainer - maybe an oil platform. Wind-powered scow. Whatever. Basic clan structure aboard ship. Sea level is high, storms are severe and radioactive. Those that stayed behind. They are still overseen by the machines. There's no scope for crime. Everyone is monitored all the time, except when there's a particularly screwy aurora or whatever?
Whom can I read about to get some grounding in self-determination? Don't want to make it an absolute replica of Israel, Palestine, but it would be a starting point.
<<<<<<< HEAD
Keep an eye on what happens to Greece, and learn up on what happened to Cyprus, Iceland, Argentina when the carpet got pulled from under them. Also Detroit.
It's still a personal story, tho. Two families. Because there are still families, because the version of us that is now us has decided to retain such notions. A village - the optimal setting for a human.
=======
Keep an eye on what happens to Greece and Venezuela, and learn up on what happened to Cyprus, Iceland, Argentina when the carpet got pulled from under them. Also Detroit.
It's still a personal story, tho. Two families. Because there are still families, because the version of us that is now us has decided to retain such notions.
>>>>>>> 943852ceac6e13a3cef2267c07527b2a367fd0e0
Maybe the machines are programmed to nurse us for a short while, then step back, and power down. This means that not all colonies will make it. The colonies have limited/no contact with one another. I want to emphasise that space is large. Can a story still be told if it doesn't include real-ish time contention/communication?
Opening needs to set the background up in a way that's subtle, and comprehensible. Maybe a big plot point could be the fact that the hero's parents are machines. How heteronormative are we gonna be here? Reproduction is post-sexual etc. Other experiences of gender are no longer any impediment, threat.
Role of religion. Rules keep people on the straight and narrow, but in a post-scarcity milieu, the straight and narrow and be fairly broadly interpreted. Crime is difficult and unpunished crime is impossible. Crime is treated as a symptom of mental illness, and dealt with via 'treatment' rather than punishment. People must be more subtle in order to injust one another and give offence, jockey for power. All power is devolved, abstracted anyway. More parallels with modernity.
What do we want? Work, relationships, achievements/status, hope of success/possibility of failure, entertainment, food, water, shelter. Problems arising: dealing with mental illness, asshattery - allowing enough freedom for the majority, while containing the minority. Helping the minority to some non-destructive self-actualisation. What do we do with the bung ones? Is this all handled by algorithm? Have we weeded out all the interesting genes?
This could be another point of contention. You need a lot of mad, sad, bad people to get a star. Is humanity just a legion of scrubbed Lindens?
References to the New Luddite uprisings of the mid-21st century. They were put down by militarised police and contractors in the pay of the 1%. Eventually the 1% joined because mechanisation was eroding their profit base, but by then it was too late. Nation states dissolved?
China's UnionPay took over global payments as the Greenback declined. There was a relatively brief window where it could all have gone to another Dark Age, but the machines just barely managed to be invented in time, to the point where they could be self-sustaining and self-improving.
Human endeavour ebbed from this point, so that even fewer people know how the machines actually work, and can maintain or control them. Current series machines are vastly beyond our ken. Contemporary engineers could no more fix them than a a current person could fix their own CPU.
Display, comparison, competition. Competition for what? Resources are not scarce. Experiences. Acclaim. Progeny. How are these aspirations meted out?
It all comes back to compelling, believable, sympathetic motivations.
I suppose I will need to incorporate BMIs to some extent. Or at least acknowledge them, and ban them. Maybe that's the central struggle. One group wants to embrace the neural lace, the other is agin it. Those with it get looked after by the skynet. Those without it live with somewhat more privacy, but are excluded from the overarching dialogue. Akin to those who live without Internet access, today. The right to be forgotten.
Social stratification:
Birth IQ, talents, demons. How much is the result of genetic manipulation?
No matter what, the action all has to take place in the present, not recounted by characters. If an entity is designed to accept its asciety, then surely it will never doubt its own existence.
The economy needs to be somewhat sustainable. Maybe look to an Indian caste-type system, and transplant that into a more western millieu.
In India, one has to hustle, and there's an element of Darwinism at play. In the west, the downtrodden are relatively inert? Placated, medicated, and provided for. Relatively low-quality/low-place foods, entertainments, clothing, but also relentless exposure to how the elites are gadding about. Lifestyles of the rich and famous - only popular viewing if there's some kind of hope. Lottery is the only one for most of the plebs. At present in the west, lottery, rapping, kingpinnery, startup-gets-acquired, property. Elites can quell disquiet by providing enough, and something to aspire to. However, elites don't really exist. Maybe this can be the crux of it. Everyone waiting for someone else to fix everything - kicking the can further up the pile to those who are just interested in building rockets. The non-consumers become superfluous. How does this work in India? Everyone be hustling, or starving.
How would an authoratarian government take over an armed populace? Maybe they have a point. It's more likely that such an armed militia would be an arm of government, rather than an organised resistance. It's much more likely to be used against the population, rather than in defence of it. In Handmaids Tale, for eg, there would have been a civil war, rather than meek acquiescence. Unless all the frothing second amendmenters were Under His Eye.
Village > City > Guild > Nation > Corp. Shareholders supposedly own the corps, but have very little control. They take a small rent, but are treated more as lenders, than owners. Those who actually control the activities of the corps (and benefit to the greatest degree) are a smaller number of executive and board members. The big money these days is non-productive: clicks, finance, law. The dead hand of Wall Street. Large corps as net importers, because of their tax structures. Social services being offered for profit, including being abstracted into insurance. What else could be the basis of an insurance industry? An unlikely misadventure, that's not already subject to insurance. Legal assistance as an insurance product. Could there be an entertainment-type product that is sold on an insurance basis? Or as a subscription. Subscribe to food, to transport, to energy, exercise, companionship, many of these are already on the market.
A village-style troupe is running a jellyfish trawler. It's powered by sail and algorithm to scoop up the max jellyfish in the min time with the min delta v. Some of the jellyfish is rendered to power the screws and the ship. What kind of power output could we expect from a ton of fermented jellyfish? The balance goes toward their protein blocks. They also (probably?) contain fresh water. They can pull out enough that their factory ship can support 50 people. Or maybe two ships hauling a net, or two seasteds with a net running between them. Two old oil rigs, now hauling out jellyfish and krill. Biomass and protein. Bunker fuel tanks are now digesters. And quite whiffy, one would expect. Try to tell a keyhole story, that needs to stand up in its own right. Need to develop that, before carrying on with the fun stuff, really. No story, no story.
Maybe the resource that people are competing for is actually not particularly novel afterall: a source of relatively decent genes for their progeny. Social Darwinism has taken a back seat to Darwin Darwinism. While we have the ability to do gene therapy and implant uber-babies, their genes do not carry foward to their own children. The generation that doesn't have access to gene therapy will be the last generation of elites. The plebs, on the other hand, have had to contend with high infant mortality, so their genes are relatively wild and vigorous. High quality plebs are always being poached to reinvigorate the elites' bloodlines - much like the in-bred aristocracy of olde. The Viking's equivalent of carrying off the pick of European womanhood. So whom do we have on this boat? The Families are somewhat in hiding, because their progeny are in relatively good nick, and would be in high demand.
Technological progress was carrying along merrily until shortly before the point where AI was able to design more sophisticated AIs. At that point, there was some kind of Butlerian Jihad, and we avoided the geometric improvement of AI, but also missed out on the potential benefits. The jihad took out a generation of hi-tech scholars, smashed many fabs, and generally set us back a bit. There's still lots of chips about, but they no longer get thrown out after two years. Many have been forcibly requisitioned by governments.
Contention between 'wild' humans and domesticated humans who use surgery etc to ammeleorate the effects of inbreeding and reduced selective pressure on degeneration of organs. Wild humans have a much higher infant mortality. It's not eugenics as such, just a general selection for the ones that aren't too messed up. Corrective surgery (including glasses) are outlawed. Fertility among the wildlings is much higher, however. The corps are limited. C-section is overwhelming majority of births. The offspring immediately get corrective surgeries. Occasional kidnappings, in order to refresh the line. Viking style pillaging and carryings off.
